---
layout: product
title: Lesson Four
topic: The UI Panels
description: tba 
date: 2023-04-08 09:00:07
hero_image: /assets/images/Logo_Blender_50.png
image: /assets/images/Logo_Blender_50.png
hero_height: is-large
hero_darken: true
tags: blender intro teaching
published: true
permalink: /Lesson_Plan/LP-0004/
# series: teaching-units
---
# Precise Blocking Using Reference Images

At this point, the students should be able to manage the setup of reference images in a workspace. The starting point for this exercise is a set-up workspace containing two reference images of the robot, properly aligned with the X and Y axes. This should be a simple thing for them to do, but the instructor may want to have a file with this set up avaiable if there are teams that do not.

There are three videos that the students will watch, in sequence, and with exercises in between. The students should complete the exercises associated with each video, before going on to view the next video.

The primary point of this lesson is to get students to use reference images to ensure accurate placement of blocking elements in a model. In the robot reference, each element is essentially independent of the other parts. This is intentional, and sets up a contrast with later exercises where they will build a human figure. Most lifeform figures will be made up of a single, sculpted object, unlike the robot. Learning to deal with parts of a non-human figure as discrete objects while accurately following a reference is a key skill for creating assets that reflect a desginer's idea, even if they are the desginre themselves.

## Video One

The primary skills in the first video involve moving placing a simple primitive in the intended location. This can be done by addi a block anywhere. But it's important in this lesson that the students accustom themselves to being able to place an object at a particular point in the 3D workspace. This involves an awareness of the use of the 3D cursor. The student should display a comfort level with this technique. 

NOTE: The video shows the workspace set up with an existing, default cube at the centre location. When the student can perform the exercise, they should be instructed to deleted the block, leaving the reference images. Then, they should be asked to place a cube, and align it, and reshape it. Because the default cube is always at zero zero zero, ensuring that the student has control without a default object is a key skill.

HINT: emphasize to the student that the 3D cursor can be placed at the exact centre of the workspace using the Control-C key combination. This both provides them with a good starting point, and emphasizes the importance of orienting models to the origin of the workspace in a controlled way, without arbitrary offsets in any dimension.

Once an object is placed, moving between the front and side views is necessary to understand the actual size of placed object relative to the reference. The student should use this technique comfortably before moving forward. 

HINT: the numeric keypad on the student's keyboard is the preferred way of moving between orthographic views. The widget in the upper corner can introduce slight shifts of the view from orthographic, and this in turn can cause Blender to move into perspective view. 


## Video Two

This shows the first stage in adding the objects that make up the robot. The technique show is to choose an orthographic view, and add a second cube that will form the head of the robot. 

This technique depends on two things: that the 3D cursor is at zero on X, and that the body cube is also centred on X. If either of these are not true, the two meshes (cubes) will not align. If the student does not have one, or the other, or both cubes aligned and on 
X zero, the problem should be highlighted, and discussed. What strategies can be used to ensure that this is the case? WHat importance does it have in building the model accurately?

In lifeform models, and in many other forms that are anthropomorphic, axial symmetry is of signficance. Because few such forms display more complex symmetry, the students should consider that the conventions followed in choosing which axes are symmetrical can be very important in Game development and in 3D modelling.

HINT: there are other ways to ensure objects are aligned. One way to do so, is to select an object - in this case, the body - and duplicate it. Duplicates in BLender are aligned with their originals, so axial alignment is guaranteed. When doing this, the user needs to immediately click the right mouse button after moving the duplicate. This will mean the duplication occurs, but no movement is imparted. After this, the student can then move the object (in this case, the head) on the Z axis, by typing G to grab or move, and immediately Z to constrain movement to the vertical direction. However, this technique should be considered an advanced technique, and only introduced if the students are completely comfortable with the technique shown in the video. Unless there is ample time to go through this technique and get students up to speed on it before continuing on, avoid confusion by introducing it.

After the second block has been created, and is aligned with the body, and with the X axis, the student should reshape the block to the general boundaries of the head in the reference, as they had done with the body.

## Video Three

This longer video may take more time to analyze and understand. In it, a second type of object - a cylinder - is added between the head and the body, which are in their proper blocked sizes. This will introduce new complications that have to do with the orientation of the cylinder, and with the arrangement of symmetry. 

As well, the cylinder may be visually obscured by the other objects depending on the point of view that the student is viewing it from. 

THere are several strategies that can be introduced here. One is the use of different viewing modes, most notably Wireframe and Solid. XRay mode can also help or hinder the operations that need to be peformed (selection, rotation, and scaling in particular). The students should be allowed to explore their options from the techniques they were already made familiar with. 

NOTE: in the video, misalignments that it was possible to overlook before the object were connected became clear. In part, these are because the reference image is used as a location for the 3D cursor. But on examination, it may be seen that the reference images themselves are not necessarily centered. More exactly, even if the plane of the image is perfectly centred on the appropriate axis, that does not mean that the actual image itself is. The cropping of the original image will probably have left the robot itself imperfectly centred in the image space.

As well, some operations are taking place in perspective view. See if the students pick up on this detail, and ask them to comment on how this should be dealt with.

This exercise is not meant to contain a requirement for every detail to be perfectly executed. Later, better techniques for ensuring symmetry will be introduced. The main focus is on giving the students a sense of control of the workspace and objects in it, and a creative direction to practice the techniques that are shown here.

Different students will be able to execute these techniques with greater and lesser facility. Only once every member of each team has completed the initial placement of the three blocks, should they be allowed to move forward with the exercise. If a team completes before other teams, they should be told to simply repeat the whole exercise from scratch, until all teams have completed it. 

If all teams finish quickly, and there is time left in the class to do so, and complete the robot, set up a contest to have each team time their best time to create the three-block setup, accurately and completely, starting from just the reference images. Ask each team to screen capture their execution, to allow precise timing for each team.

## Completing the Lesson

Once the three blocks are created, ask the students to practice the technique of duplicating the body block, and locating it where the arm goes, and then scaling it accordhingly. 

HINT: Shift-D can be used to duplicate a selected object.

Once the starting block for the arm is added, ask the students to try to recreate it on the other side. Give them some time to explore ways to do this, that create an exactly symmetrical location for the second arm. This should be done using only the techniques explored so far.

HINT: The easiest way to do this, using techniques in their set of taught techniques, is to duplicate the object, which might be the left arm. At time of duplication, they will be able to move the duplicated object using the Grab (G key), and when they have confirmed the duplication, clicking the right mouse button. This will cause the duplicate to snap into the same position as the original. Then, in the numeric panel on the top right of the workspace, or in the object's attributes area outside the workspace, simply alter the X axis value to its negative value. This will cause the object to move to the other side of the main axis of symmetry.

Introduce this technique only if the students are at a comfortable level with the basic tasks. This anticipates approaches in later lessons, so it's not crucial that they adopt this approach now. If they aren't introduced to it, simply let them do their best, with the approaches they have learned.

From this point, the students should be ready to build a complete blocked model of the robot, that follows accurately the general proportions of the reference images.








